politicians found out that people
enjoyed feeling wealthy even if they
weren't and again we were not a country
founded on the ideals of debt equals
prosperity no no you save you invest you
prosper and having Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac and the FHA extend extend
extend increase eligibility for
mortgages I mean when my when the
Vietnam War ended in San Antonio Texas
you know my parents borrowed money from
the parents and with the help of a VA
loan they barely got a mortgage and it
was known for their generation that they
were supposed to strive to pay that
mortgage off before they retired you
certainly don't go into retirement with
mortgage debt and yet here we are in
America today and the majority of
retirees still carry mortgage debt think
about that you're in retirement and
financially vulnerable I know it makes
it but it is what it is and it's the
culture that we have accepted and we've
been told by our leaders that it's the
way it should be who's questioning them
oh I think right now mother nature is
questioning them I think right now the
coronavirus is questioning them I think
that there is going to be a severe
cultural backlash where families feel
the pain enough to say and make
decisions on their own if they're
encouraged to take on debt sure we're
going to go back to our ways in a in
some sense of the word but there are
predictions right now that unemployment
could surpass that of what we saw during
the Great Depression I mean these are
unfathomable numbers that we're
considering in America during at the
apex at the height of the Great
Depression one in four Americans were
out of work in two weeks time two weeks
time we had 9.95 nearly 10 million
jobless claims in America in two weeks
time we got to one in six
teen Americans and what we know from
studying Google Trends you can you can
track any word on Google Trends right
now if you track unemployment insurance
it's really popular especially in Texas
and in New York and in other states
where there's been a tremendous backlog
Florida is going to be coming up
big-time because they have such an
antiquated unemployment insurance system
that people can't get through to file
the unemployment insurance claims that
they need to right now but what we know
from studying Google Trends is that the
third wave was even bigger than the
first and the second waves as other
states went into shutdown so we haven't
seen the worst of what we're going to
see in terms of the ranks of Americans
who are unemployed they took a survey
just overnight seventy five percent of
Americans have seen their income cut by
at least 25 percent in other words even
people who are keeping their jobs aren't
making the same amount sure they're not
working the same hours maybe one of the
two breadwinners lost their lost their
job you've got your kids at home online
schooling and you're trying to do your
job even if you are working remotely you
may as well be on your roof trying to
get your job done and inform a sentence
I'm a writer I mean I write and conduct
research and it's things work out really
well for me around 4:00 or 5:00 a.m.
when the whole house is asleep but this
is this is a cultural shift is what I'm
trying to say this is unlike anything
generations have seen since those who
survived the Great Depression so mother
nature is holding these people
accountable with coronavirus aka
coronavirus which and I'm not saying
it's revenge or anything major I'm just
saying it's it's shining a very bright
light I totally get it it's kind of it's
it's a it's highlighting a lot of the
things that they've been doing that we
haven't been prepared for and now hey
you're being held accountable what we're
gonna do now I get that part when we
read you know the articles that say
unemployment is projected by the end of
second quarter to be at 30% just kind of
you read it you're like yeah it's gonna
be at 30% you know you know you're
looking at the news it's gonna be a 30
person
it's gonna be at 30% and let me skip the
channel then I'm gonna go to this next
month 30% is 30% what what does that
really mean if you were to unpack so and
here's what I mean by unpack 30% if we
were to unpack 30% consequences a ripple
effect if we go to 30% 75% is minus 25%
of income right now of Americans
one out of four was unemployed back in a
great depression 30% means one in three
point three so we're gonna go into some
tough times
what is the ripple effects and what
industries what happens to people
economy safety what does that go
what could I look like so you're asking
the key question here because for as
large as the fiscal stimulus is and
we've already got two trillion out there
the Federal Reserve's going to lever up
by a multiple of ten four hundred and
fifty billion dollars so that they can
keep a lot of businesses still in
business some of which may or may not
deserve to go out of business but we'll
get to that but the fact is from what we
know today the stimulus checks aren't
going to hit until when a lot of
Americans have been out of work for six
weeks or more the time the actual
stimulus money hits their accounts six
weeks well it was three weeks from the
time of the signing of when Congress
passed the legislation and it was signed
into law and by then there were plenty
of Americans who had been in shutdown
for two or three weeks so there have
been a lot of people who have been
trying to get by on god knows what
that's why you've seen wealthy
Restaurant tours in major cities open
their restaurants back up on their own
dime to feed people who don't have food
we're talking about red lines that you
read about in history class in middle
school people who don't have food and
let's let's stick with restaurants for
just a second the the percentage of
restaurants that are never going to
return never is tremendous what do you
mean by that never going to return never
going to reopen never going to be able
to find the financing your average
restaurant has two or three days of cash
flow on hand
a great restaurant maybe has one or two
weeks of cash flow on hand but they've
been asked by the government to keep all
of their employees employed and wait for
the Small Business Administration loans
to come through and float them through
to the end of September a lot of
business people in America did the math
and said this isn't going to work and I
can't tell you that the demand is going
to be there at the end of the second
quarter
best case scenario I don't I you can't
tell me that as many Americans are gonna
go out and spend the way they used to
you can't tell me that as many Americans
are going to go to concerts go to the
movies go to sporting events go to music
festivals get on planes you know
something of this magnitude I mean
there's a headline that hit today there
are more New Yorkers who have died as a
as a as a consequence of the corona
virus then what then what died on 9/11
you know I was I was in New York at the
time I worked on Wall Street at the time
it's something that reshaped my life and
the way I viewed the world now magnify
that spread that across a nation we're
gonna change the way we spend and if we
change the way we spend we're not going
to need to tap into as many services as
we once did as a nation so what I'm
trying to say is let's say we get to 30%
unemployment and let's say the worst of
the virus has passed that doesn't mean
the economy is going to heal overnight
it might take years and that's what
people are not factoring in because if
you have something of such magnitude
that it changes the way you view the
world and it changes the way you view
spending 2019 was an extraordinary year
in American history business investment
had clamped down appreciably we had a
trade war going on in the background
there was a global economic slowdown
China in the United States weren't there
weren't Chinese people coming
buying us home so so there were a lot of
things that didn't occur in 2019 to
offset it was the American consumer was
the US household consumption is
typically two-thirds of the US economy
that's the way it's been urine and
year-out
for a very long time in 2019 consumption
was 90 percent of the u.s. economy as
the Federal Reserve did everything they
could to elevate the stock market keep
risky asset prices up keep people
feeling wealthy because they look at
their 401ks and spend and spend and
spend and spend beyond their means
ninety percent of US gross domestic
product in 2019 was consumption I can't
tell you when we're going to get back to
a normal world of two-thirds of the US
economy being consumption because of
these massive shock that this is placing
on US households and the way that
they're going to perceive money going
forward is going to be a tremendous
change
so you're saying even after this we go
back to business as usual the recovery
is not going to be immediate because you
have two camps right now right one camp
is saying the moment this thing clears
up we're gonna have the economy's going
to go back to $30,000 gonna hit 30,000
ago back to you know business as usual
people gonna go back out and they're
gonna do what they're doing you're
saying no it's going to take a while for
us to recover from this
[Music]